In the reign of the same caliph, Haroun-al-Raschid, of whom we
have already heard, there lived at Bagdad a poor porter called
Hindbad. One day, when the weather was excessively hot, he was
employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to the
other. Being much fatigued, he took off his load, and sat upon it,
near a large mansion.

He was much pleased that he stopped at this place; for the
agreeable smell of wood of aloes and of pastils that came from the
house, mixing with the scent of the rose-water, completely
perfumed and embalmed the air. Besides, he heard from within a
concert of instrumental music, accompanied with the harmonious
notes of nightingales and other birds. This charming melody, and
the smell of several sorts of savory dishes, made the porter
conclude there was a feast with great rejoicings within. He went
to some of the servants, whom he saw standing at the gate in
magnificent apparel, and asked the name of the proprietor. "How,"
replied one of them, "do you live in Bagdad, and know not that
this is the house of Sindbad the Sailor, that famous voyager who
has sailed round the world?" The porter lifted up his eyes to
heaven, and said, loud enough to be heard, "Almighty Creator of
all things, consider the difference between Sindbad and me! I am
every day exposed to fatigues and calamities, and can scarcely get
coarse barley-bread for myself and my family, while happy Sindbad
expends immense riches, and leads a life of continual pleasure.
What has he done to obtain from Thee a lot so agreeable? And what
have I done to deserve one so wretched?"

While the porter was thus indulging his melancholy, a servant came
out of the house, and taking him by the arm, bade him follow him,
for Sindbad, his master, wanted to speak to him. The servants
brought him into a great hall, where a number of people sat round
a table, covered with all sorts of savory dishes. At the upper end
sat a comely, venerable gentleman, with a long white beard, and
behind him stood a number of officers and domestics, all ready to
attend his pleasure. This person was Sindbad. Hindbad, whose fear
was increased at the sight of so many people, and of a banquet so
sumptuous, saluted the company trembling. Sindbad bade him draw
near, and seating him at his right hand, served him himself, and
gave him excellent wine, of which there was abundance upon the
sideboard.

Now, Sindbad had heard the porter complain through the window, and
this it was that induced him to have him brought in. When the
repast was over, Sindbad addressed his conversation to Hindbad,
and inquired his name and employment, and said: "I wish to hear
from your own mouth what it was you lately said in the street."

At this request Hindbad hung down his head in confusion, and
replied: "My lord, I confess that my fatigue put me out of humor,
and occasioned me to utter some indiscreet words, which I beg you
to pardon." "Do not think I am so unjust," resumed Sindbad, "as to
resent such a complaint. But I must correct your error concerning
myself. You think, no doubt, that I have acquired without labor
and trouble the ease and indulgence which I now enjoy. But do not
mistake; I did not attain to this happy condition without enduring
for several years more trouble of body and mind than can well be
imagined. Yes, gentlemen," he added, speaking to the whole
company, "I assure you that my sufferings have been of a nature so
extraordinary as would deprive the greatest miser of his love of
riches; and as an opportunity now offers, I will, with your leave,
relate the dangers I have encountered, which I think will not be
uninteresting to you."




THE FIRST VOYAGE


My father was a rich merchant. He bequeathed me a large estate,
which I wasted in riotous living. I quickly, perceived that I was
misspending my time, which is of all things the most valuable. I
remembered the saying of the great Solomon, which I had frequently
heard from my father, "A good name is better than precious
ointment"; and again, "Wisdom is good with an inheritance." I
resolved to walk in my father's ways, and I entered into a
contract with some merchants, and embarked with them on board a
ship we had fitted out in partnership.

We set sail, and steered our course toward the Indies, through the
Persian Gulf. At first I was troubled with sea-sickness, but
speedily recovered my health. In our voyage we touched at several
islands, where we sold or exchanged our goods. One day we were
becalmed near a small island, but little elevated above the level
of the water, and resembling a green meadow. The captain ordered
his sails to be furled, and permitted such persons as were so
inclined to land. While we were enjoying ourselves eating and
drinking, and recovering from the fatigue of the sea, the island
of a sudden trembled and shook us terribly.

The trembling of the island was noticed on board ship, and we were
called upon to re-embark speedily, lest we should all be lost; for
what we took for an island proved to be the back of a sea monster.

The nimblest got into the sloop, others betook themselves to
swimming; but as for myself, I was still upon the island when it
disappeared into the sea, and I had only time to catch hold of a
piece of wood that we had brought out of the ship to make a fire.
Meanwhile, the captain, having received on board those who were in
the sloop, and taken up some of those that swam, resolved to take
advantage of the favorable gale that had just risen, and, hoisting
his sails, pursued his voyage.

Thus was I exposed to the mercy of the waves the rest of that day
and the following night. By this time I found my strength gone,
and despaired of saving my life, when happily a wave threw me on
an island. The bank was high and rugged, so that I could scarcely
have got up had it not been for some roots of trees which I found
within reach. When the sun arose I was very feeble. I found some
herbs fit to eat, and had the good luck to discover a spring of
excellent water. After this I advanced further into the island,
and at last reached a fine plain, where I perceived some horses
feeding. On my way toward them I heard the voice of a man, who
asked me who I was. I related to him my adventure, after which,
taking me by the hand, he led me into a cave, where there were
several other people, no less amazed to see me than I was to see
them.

I partook of some provisions which they offered me, and asked them
what they did in such a desert place; to which they answered that
they were grooms belonging to the sovereign of the island, and
that every year they brought thither the king's horses for
pasturage. They were to return home on the morrow, and had I been
one day later I must have perished, because the inhabited part of
the island was a great distance off, and it would have been
impossible for me to have reached it without a guide.

Next morning they returned to the capital of the island, took me
with them, and presented me to their king. He asked me who I was,
and by what adventure I had come into his dominions. After I had
satisfied him, he ordered that I should want for nothing.

Being a merchant, I frequented men of my own profession, and
particularly inquired for those who were strangers, that perchance
I might hear news from Bagdad, or find an opportunity to return.
For the Maharaja's capital is situated on the sea-coast, and has
a fine harbor, where ships arrive daily from the different
quarters of the world. I frequented also the society of the
learned Indians, and took delight to hear them converse; but
withal, I took care to make my court regularly to the Maharaja,
and conversed with the governors and petty kings, his tributaries,
that were about him. They put a thousand questions respecting my
country; and I, being willing to inform myself as to their laws
and customs, asked them concerning everything which I thought
worth knowing.

There belongs to this king an island named Cassel.

They assured me that every night a noise of drums was heard there,
whence the mariners fancied that it was the residence of Degial. I
determined to visit this wonderful place, and in my way thither
saw fishes of 100 and 200 cubits long that occasion more fear than
hurt; for they are so timorous that they will fly upon the
rattling of two sticks or boards. I saw likewise other fish about
a cubit in length, that had heads like owls.

As I was one day at the port after my return, the ship arrived in
which I had embarked at Bussorah. I at once knew the captain, and
I went and asked him for my bales. "I am Sindbad," said I, "and
those bales marked with his name are mine."

When the captain heard me speak thus, "Heavens!" he exclaimed,
"whom can we trust in these times? I saw Sindbad perish with my
own eyes, as did also the passengers on board, and yet you tell me
you are that Sindbad. What impudence is this! and what a false
tale to tell, in order to possess yourself of what does not belong
to you!" "Have patience," replied I; "do me the favor to hear what
I have to say." The captain was at length persuaded that I was no
cheat; for there came people from his ship who knew me, paid me
great compliments, and expressed much joy at seeing me alive. At
last he recollected me himself, and embracing me, "Heaven be
praised," said he, "for your happy escape! I cannot express the
joy it affords me. There are your goods; take and do with them as
you please."

I took out what was most valuable in my bales, and presented them
to the Maharaja, who, knowing my misfortune, asked me how I came
by such rarities. I acquainted him with the circumstance of their
recovery. He was pleased at my good luck, accepted my present, and
in return gave me one much more considerable. Upon this I took
leave of him, and went aboard the same ship, after I had exchanged
my goods for the commodities of that country. I carried with me
wood of aloes, sandals, camphire, nutmegs, cloves, pepper, and
ginger. We passed by several islands, and at last arrived at
Bussorah, from whence I came to this city, with the value of
100,000 sequins.

Sindbad stopped here, and ordered the musicians to proceed with
their concert, which the story had interrupted. When it was
evening, Sindbad sent for a purse of 100 sequins, and giving it to
the porter, said, "Take this, Hindbad, return to your home, and
come back to-morrow to hear more of my adventures." The porter
went away, astonished at the honor done him and the present made
him. The account of this adventure proved very agreeable to his
wife and children, who did not fail to return thanks for what
Providence had sent them by the hand of Sindbad.

Hindbad put on his best robe next day, and returned to the
bountiful traveller, who received him with a pleasant air, and
welcomed him heartily. When all the guests had arrived, dinner was
served, and continued a long time. When it was ended, Sindbad,
addressing himself to the company, said, "Gentlemen, be pleased to
listen to the adventures of my second voyage. They deserve your
attention even more than those of the first." Upon which every one
held his peace, and Sindbad proceeded.




THE SECOND VOYAGE


I designed, after my first voyage, to spend the rest of my days at
Bagdad, but it was not long ere I grew weary of an indolent life,
and I put to sea a second time, with merchants of known probity.
We embarked on board a good ship, and, after recommending
ourselves to God, set sail. We traded from island to island, and
exchanged commodities with great profit. One day we landed on an
island covered with several sorts of fruit-trees, but we could see
neither man nor animal We walked in the meadows, along the streams
that watered them. While some diverted themselves with gathering
flowers, and others fruits, I took my wine and provisions, and sat
down near a stream between two high trees, which formed a thick
shade. I made a good meal, and afterward fell asleep. I cannot
tell how long I slept, but when I awoke the ship was gone.

In this sad condition, I was ready to die with grief.

I cried out in agony, beat my head and breast, and threw myself
upon the ground, where I lay some time in despair. I upbraided
myself a hundred times for not being content with the produce of
my first voyage, that might have sufficed me all my life. But all
this was in vain, and my repentance came too late. At last I
resigned myself to the will of God. Not knowing what to do, I
climbed up to the top of a lofty tree, from which I looked about
on all sides, to see if I could discover anything that could give
me hopes. When I gazed toward the sea I could see nothing but sky
and water; but looking over the land I beheld something white; and
coming down, I took what provision I had left, and went toward it,
the distance being so great that I could not distinguish what it
was.

As I approached, I thought it to be a white dome, of a prodigious
height and extent; and when I came up to it, I touched it, and
found it to be very smooth. I went round to see if it was open on
any side, but saw it was not, and that there was no climbing up to
the top, as it was so smooth. It was at least fifty paces round.

By this time the sun was about to set, and all of a sudden the sky
became as dark as if it had been covered with a thick cloud. I was
much astonished at this sudden darkness, but much more when I
found it occasioned by a bird of a monstrous size, that came
flying toward me. I remembered that I had often heard mariners
speak of a miraculous bird called the roc, and conceived that the
great dome which I so much admired must be its egg. In short, the
bird alighted, and sat over the egg. As I perceived her coming, I
crept close to the egg, so that I had before me one of the legs of
the bird, which was as big as the trunk of a tree. I tied myself
strongly to it with my turban, in hopes that the roc next morning
would carry me with her out of this desert island. After having
passed the night in this condition, the bird flew away as soon as
it was daylight, and carried me so high that I could not discern
the earth; she afterward descended with so much rapidity that I
lost my senses. But when I found myself on the ground, I speedily
untied the knot, and had scarcely done so, when the roc, having
taken up a serpent of monstrous length in her bill, flew away.

The spot where it left me was encompassed on all sides by
mountains, that seemed to reach above the clouds, and so steep
that there was no possibility of getting out of the valley. This
was a new perplexity; so that when I compared this place with the
desert island from which the roc had brought me, I found that I
had gained nothing by the change.

As I walked through this valley, I perceived it was strewn with
diamonds, some of which were of a surprising bigness. I took
pleasure in looking upon them; but shortly saw at a distance such
objects as greatly diminished my satisfaction, and which I could
not view without terror, namely, a great number of serpents, so
monstrous that the least of them was capable of swallowing an
elephant. They retired in the daytime to their dens, where they
hid themselves from the roc, their enemy, and came out only in the
night.

I spent the day in walking about in the valley, resting myself at
times in such places as I thought most convenient. When night came
on I went into a cave, where I thought I might repose in safety. I
secured the entrance, which was low and narrow, with a great
stone, to preserve me from the serpents, but not so far as to
exclude the light. I supped on part of my provisions, but the
serpents, which began hissing round me, put me into such extreme
fear that I did not sleep. When day appeared the serpents retired,
and I came out of the cave trembling. I can justly say that I
walked upon diamonds, without feeling any inclination to touch
them. At last I sat down, and notwithstanding my apprehensions,
not having closed my eyes during the night, fell asleep, after
having eaten a little more of my provisions. But I had scarcely
shut my eyes when something that fell by me with a great noise
awaked me. This was a large piece of raw meat; and at the same
time I saw several others fall down from the rocks in different
places. I had always regarded as fabulous what I had heard sailors
and others relate of the valley of diamonds, and of the stratagems
employed by merchants to obtain jewels from thence; but now I
found that they had stated nothing but the truth. For the fact is,
that the merchants come to the neighborhood of this valley, when
the eagles have young ones, and throwing great joints of meat into
the valley, the diamonds, upon whose points they fall, stick to
them; the eagles, which are stronger in this country than anywhere
else, pounce with great force upon those pieces of meat and carry
them to their nests on the precipices of the rocks to feed their
young: the merchants at this time run to their nests, disturb and
drive off the eagles by their shouts, and take away the diamonds
that stick to the meat.

I perceived in this device the means of my deliverance.

Having collected together the largest diamonds I could find, and
put them into the leather bag in which I used to carry my
provisions, I took the largest of the pieces of meat, tied it
close round me with the cloth of my turban, and then laid myself
upon the ground, with my face downward, the bag of diamonds being
made fast to my girdle.

I had scarcely placed myself in this posture when one of the
eagles, having taken me up with the piece of meat to which I was
fastened, carried me to his nest on the top of the mountain. The
merchants immediately began their shouting to frighten the eagles;
and when they had obliged them to quit their prey, one of them
came to the nest where I was. He was much alarmed when he saw me;
but recovering himself, instead of inquiring how I came thither,
began to quarrel with me, and asked why I stole his goods. "You
will treat me," replied I, "with more civility, when you know me
better. Do not be uneasy; I have diamonds enough for you and
myself, more than all the other merchants together. Whatever they
have they owe to chance; but I selected for myself, in the bottom
of the valley, those which you see in this bag." I had scarcely
done speaking, when the other merchants came crowding about us,
much astonished to see me; but they were much more surprised when
I told them my story.

They conducted me to their encampment; and there, having opened my
bag, they were surprised at the largeness of my diamonds, and
confessed that they had never seen any of such size and
perfection. I prayed the merchant who owned the nest to which I
had been carried (for every merchant had his own), to take as many
for his share as he pleased. He contented himself with one, and
that, too, the least of them; and when I pressed him to take more,
without fear of doing me any injury, "No," said he, "I am very
well satisfied with this, which is valuable enough to save me the
trouble of making any more voyages, and will raise as great a
fortune as I desire."

I spent the night with the merchants, to whom I related my story a
second time, for the satisfaction of those who had not heard it. I
could not moderate my joy when I found myself delivered from the
danger I have mentioned. I thought myself in a dream, and could
scarcely believe myself out of danger.

The merchants had thrown their pieces of meat into the valley for
several days; and each of them being satisfied with the diamonds
that had fallen to his lot, we left the place the next morning,
and travelled near high mountains, where there were serpents of a
prodigious length, which we had the good-fortune to escape. We
took shipping at the first port we reached, and touched at the
isle of Roha, where the trees grow that yield camphire. This tree
is so large, and its branches so thick, that one hundred men may
easily sit under its shade. The juice of which the camphire is
made exudes from a hole bored in the upper part of the tree, is
received in a vessel, where it thickens to a consistency, and
becomes what we call camphire. After the juice is thus drawn out
the tree withers and dies.

In this island is also found the rhinoceros, an animal less than
the elephant, but larger than the buffalo.

It has a horn upon its nose, about a cubit in length; this horn is
solid, and cleft through the middle. The rhinoceros fights with
the elephant, runs his horn into his belly, and carries him off
upon his head; but the blood and the fat of the elephant running
into his eyes and making him blind, he falls to the ground; and
then, strange to relate, the roc comes and carries them both away
in her claws for food for her young ones.

I pass over many other things peculiar to this island, lest I
should weary you. Here I exchanged some of my diamonds for
merchandise.

From hence we went to other islands, and at last, having touched
at several trading towns of the continent, we landed at Bussorah,
from whence I proceeded to Bagdad. There I immediately gave large
presents to the poor, and lived honorably upon the vast riches I
had bought and gained with so much fatigue.

Thus Sindbad ended the relation of the second voyage, gave Hindbad
another hundred sequins, and invited him to come the next day to
hear the account of the third.




THE THIRD VOYAGE


I soon again grew weary of living a life of idleness, and
hardening myself against the thought of any danger, I embarked
with some merchants on another long voyage. We touched at several
ports, where we traded. One day we were overtaken by a dreadful
tempest, which drove us from our course.

The storm continued several days, and brought us before the port
of an island, which the captain was very unwilling to enter; but
we were obliged to cast anchor. When we had furled our sails, the
captain told us that this and some other neighboring islands were
inhabited by hairy savages, who would speedily attack us; and
though they were but dwarfs, yet that we must make no resistance,
for they were more in number than the locusts; and if we happened
to kill one, they would all fall upon us and destroy us.

We soon found that what the captain had told us was but too true.
An innumerable multitude of frightful savages, about two feet
high, covered all over with red hair, came swimming toward us and
encompassed our ship. They chattered as they came near, but we
understood not their language. They climbed up the sides of the
ship with such agility as surprised us. They took down our sails,
cut the cable, and, hauling to the shore, made us all get out, and
afterward carried the ship into another island, whence they had
come. As we advanced, we perceived at a distance a vast pile of
building, and made toward it. We found it to be a palace,
elegantly built, and very lofty, with a gate of ebony of two
leaves, which we opened. We saw before us a large apartment, with
a porch, having on one side a heap of human bones, and on the
other a vast number of roasting-spits. We trembled at this
spectacle, and were seized with deadly apprehension, when suddenly
the gate of the apartment opened with a loud crash, and there came
out the horrible figure of a black man, as tall as a lofty palm-
tree. He had but one eye, and that in the middle of his forehead,
where it blazed bright as a burning coal. His fore teeth were very
long and sharp, and stood out of his mouth, which was as deep as
that of a horse. His upper lip hung down upon his breast. His ears
resembled those of an elephant, and covered his shoulders; and his
nails were as long and crooked as the talons of the greatest
birds.

At the sight of so frightful a genie, we became insensible, and
lay like dead men.

At last we came to ourselves, and saw him sitting in the porch
looking at us. When he had considered us well, he advanced toward
us, and laying his hand upon me, took me up by the nape of my
neck, and turned me round, as a butcher would do a sheep's head.
After having examined me, and perceiving me to be so lean that I
had nothing but skin and bone, he let me go. He took up all the
rest one by one, and viewed them in the same manner. The captain
being the fattest, he held him with one hand, as I would do a
sparrow, and thrust a spit through him; he then kindled a great
fire, roasted, and ate him in his apartment for his supper. Having
finished his repast, he returned to his porch, where he lay and
fell asleep, snoring louder than thunder. He slept thus till
morning. As to ourselves, it was not possible for us to enjoy any
rest, so that we passed the night in the most painful apprehension
that can be imagined. When day appeared the giant awoke, got up,
went out, and left us in the palace.

The next night we determined to revenge ourselves on the brutish
giant, and did so in the following manner. After he had again
finished his inhuman supper on another of our seamen, he lay down
on his back, and fell asleep. As soon as we heard him snore
according to his custom, nine of the boldest among us, and myself,
took each of us a spit, and putting the points of them into his
fire till they were burning hot, we thrust them into his eye all
at once, and blinded him. The pain made him break out into a
frightful yell: he started up, and stretched out his hands, in
order to sacrifice I some of us to his rage; but we ran to such
places as he could not reach; and after having sought for us in
vain, he groped for the gate, and went out, howling in agony.

We immediately left the palace, and came to the shore, where we
made some rafts, each large enough to carry three men, with some
timber that lay about in great quantities. We waited till day in
order to get upon them, for we hoped if the giant did not appear
by sunrising, and give over his howling, which we still heard,
that he would prove to be dead; and if that happened to be the
case, we resolved to stay in that island, and not to risk our
lives upon the rafts. But day had scarcely appeared when we
perceived our cruel enemy, accompanied by two others, almost of
the same size, leading him; and a great number more coming before
him at a quick pace.

We did not hesitate to take to our rafts, and put to sea with all
the speed we could. The giants, who perceived this, took up great
stones, and, running to the shore, entered the water up to the
middle, and threw so exactly that they sunk all the rafts but that
I was upon; and all my companions except the two with me, were
drowned. We rowed with all our might, and got out of the reach of
the giants. But when we got out to sea, we were exposed to the
mercy of the waves and winds, and spent that day and the following
night under the most painful uncertainty as to our fate; but next
morning we had the good fortune to be thrown upon an island, where
we landed with much joy. We found excellent fruit, which afforded
us great relief, and recruited our strength.

At night we went to sleep on the sea-shore; but were awakened by
the noise of a serpent of surprising length and thickness, whose
scales made a rustling noise as he wound himself along. It
swallowed up one of my comrades, notwithstanding his loud cries,
and the efforts he made to extricate himself from it; dashing him
several times against the ground, it crushed him, and we could
hear it gnaw and tear the poor fellow's bones, though we had fled
to a considerable distance. The following day, to our great
terror, we saw the serpent again, when I exclaimed, "O Heaven, to
what dangers are we exposed! We rejoiced yesterday at having
escaped from the cruelty of a giant and the rage of the waves, now
are we fallen into another danger equally dreadful."

As we walked about we saw a large, tall tree, upon which we
designed to pass the following night for our security; and having
satisfied our hunger with fruit, we mounted it accordingly.
Shortly after the serpent came hissing to the foot of the tree;
raised itself up against the trunk of it, and meeting with my
comrade, who sat lower than I, swallowed him at once, and went
off.

I remained upon the tree till it was day, and then came down, more
like a dead man than one alive, expecting the same fate with my
two companions. This filled me with horror, and I advanced some
steps to throw myself into the sea; but I withstood this dictate
of despair, and submitted myself to the will of God, who disposes
of our lives at His pleasure.

In the meantime I collected together a great quantity of small
wood, brambles, and dry thorns, and making them up into fagots,
made a wide circle with them round the tree, and also tied some of
them to the branches over my head. Having done this, when the
evening came, I shut myself up within this circle, with the
melancholy satisfaction that I had neglected nothing which could
preserve me from the cruel destiny with which I was threatened.
The serpent failed not to come at the usual hour, and went round
the tree seeking for an opportunity to devour me, but was
prevented by the rampart I had made; so that he lay till day, like
a cat watching in vain for a mouse that has fortunately reached a
place of safety.

When day appeared he retired, but I dared not leave my fort until
the sun arose.

God took compassion on my hopeless state; for just as I was going,
in a fit of desperation, to throw myself into the sea, I perceived
a ship in the distance. I called as loud as I could, and,
unfolding the linen of my turban, displayed it that they might
observe me. This had the desired effect; the crew perceived me,
and the captain sent his boat for me. As soon as I came on board,
the merchants and seamen flocked about me to know how I came into
that desert island; and after I had related to them all that had
befallen me, the oldest among them said they had several times
heard of the giants that dwelt in that island, that they were
cannibals; and as to the serpents, they added that there were
abundance in the island; that they hid themselves by day and came
abroad by night. After having testified their joy at my escaping
so many dangers, they brought me the best of their provisions; and
took me before the captain, who, seeing that I was in rags, gave
me one of his own suits. Looking steadfastly upon him, I knew him
to be the person who, in my second voyage, had left me in the
island where I fell asleep, and sailed without me, or sending to
seek for me.

I was not surprised that he, believing me to be dead, did not
recognize me.

"Captain," said I, "look at me, and you may know that I am
Sindbad, whom you left in that desert island."

The captain having considered me attentively recognized me.

"God be praised!" said he, embracing me; "I rejoice that fortune
has rectified my fault. There are your goods, which I always took
care to preserve."

I took them from him, and made him my acknowledgments for his care
of them.

We continued at sea for some time, touched at several islands, and
at last landed at that of Salabat, where sandal-wood is obtained,
which is much used in medicine.

From the isle of Salabat we went to another, where I furnished
myself with cloves, cinnamon, and other spices. As we sailed from
this island we saw a tortoise twenty cubits in length and breadth.
We observed also an amphibious animal like a cow, which gave milk;
its skin is so hard that they usually make bucklers of it. I saw
another, which had the shape and color of a camel.

In short, after a long voyage, I arrived at Bussorah, and thence
returned to Bagdad with so much wealth that I knew not its extent.
I gave a great deal to the poor, and bought another considerable
estate in addition to what I had already.

Thus Sindbad finished the story of his third voyage. He gave
another hundred sequins to Hindbad, and invited him to dinner
again the next day to hear.




THE FOURTH VOYAGE


After I had rested from the dangers of my third voyage, my passion
for trade and my love of novelty soon again prevailed. I therefore
settled my affairs, and provided a stock of goods fit for the
traffic I designed to engage in. I took the route of Persia,
travelled over several provinces, and then arrived at a port,
where I embarked. On putting out to sea, we were overtaken by such
a sudden gust of wind as obliged the captain to lower his yards
and take all other necessary precautions to prevent the danger
that threatened us. But all was in vain; our endeavors had no
effect; the sails were split into a thousand pieces, and the ship
was stranded; several of the merchants and seamen were drowned,
and the cargo was lost.

I had the good fortune, with several of the merchants and
mariners, to get upon some planks, and we were carried by the
current to an island which lay before us. There we found fruit and
spring water, which preserved our lives. We stayed all night near
the place where we had been cast ashore.

Next morning, as soon as the sun was up, we explored the island,
and saw some houses, which we approached. As soon as we drew near,
we were encompassed by a great number of negroes, who seized us,
shared us among them, and carried us to their respective
habitations.

I and five of my comrades were carried to one place; here they
made us sit down, and gave us a certain herb, which they made
signs to us to eat. My comrades not taking notice that the blacks
ate none of it themselves, thought only of satisfying their
hunger, and ate with greediness. But I, suspecting some trick,
would not so much as taste it, which happened well for me; for in
a little time after I perceived my companions had lost their
senses, and that when they spoke to me they knew not what they
said.

The negroes fed us afterward with rice, prepared with oil of
cocoanuts; and my comrades, who had lost their reason, ate of it
greedily. I also partook of it, but very sparingly. They gave us
that herb at first on purpose to deprive us of our senses, that we
might not be aware of the sad destiny prepared for us; and they
supplied us with rice to fatten us; for, being cannibals, their
design was to eat us as soon as we grew fat. This accordingly
happened, for they devoured my comrades, who were not sensible of
their condition; but my senses being entire, you may easily guess
that instead of growing fat, as the rest did, I grew leaner every
day. The fear of death under which I labored turned all my food
into poison. I fell into a languishing distemper, which proved my
safety; for the negroes, having killed and eaten my companions,
seeing me to be withered, lean and sick, deferred my death.

Meanwhile I had much liberty, so that scarcely any notice was
taken of what I did, and this gave me an opportunity one day to
get at a distance from the houses and to make my escape. An old
man who saw me, and suspected my design, called to me as loud as
he could to return; but instead of obeying him I redoubled my
speed, and quickly got out of sight. At that time there was none
but the old man about the houses, the rest being abroad, and not
to return till night, which was usual with them. Therefore, being
sure that they could not arrive in time to pursue me, I went on
till night, when I stopped to rest a little, and to eat some of
the provisions I had secured; but I speedily set forward again,
and travelled seven days, avoiding those places which seemed to be
inhabited, and lived for the most part upon cocoanuts, which
served me both for meat and drink. On the eighth day I came near
the sea, and saw some white people like myself gathering pepper,
of which there was great plenty in that place. This I took to be a
good omen, and went to them without any scruple.

The people who gathered pepper came to meet me as soon as they saw
me, and asked me in Arabic who I was, and whence I came. I was
overjoyed to hear them speak in my own language, and satisfied
their curiosity by giving them an account of my shipwreck, and how
I fell into the hands of the negroes. "Those negroes," replied
they, "eat men; and by what miracle did you escape their
cruelty?" I related to them the circumstances I have just
mentioned, at which they were wonderfully surprised.

I stayed with them till they had gathered their quantity of
pepper, and then sailed with them to the island from whence they
had come. They presented me to their king, who was a good prince.
He had the patience to hear the relation of my adventures, which
surprised him, and he afterward gave me clothes, and commanded
care to be taken of me.

The island was very well peopled, plentiful in everything, and the
capital a place of great trade. This agreeable retreat was very
comfortable to me after my misfortunes, and the kindness of this
generous prince completed my satisfaction. In a word, there was
not a person more in favor with him than myself, and consequently
every man in court and city sought to oblige me, so that in a very
little time I was looked upon rather as a native than a stranger.

I observed one thing, which to me appeared very extraordinary. All
the people, the king himself not excepted, rode their horses
without bridle or stirrups. I went one day to a workman, and gave
him a model for making the stock of a saddle. When that was done,
I covered it myself with velvet and leather, and embroidered it
with gold. I afterward went to a smith, who made me a bit,
according to the pattern I showed him, and also some stirrups.
When I had all things completed, I presented them to the king, and
put them upon one of his horses. His majesty mounted immediately,
and was so pleased with them that he testified his satisfaction by
large presents.

I made several others for the ministers and principal officers of
his household, which gained me great reputation and regard.

As I paid my court very constantly to the king, he said to me one
day, "Sindbad, I love thee, I have one thing to demand of thee,
which thou must grant. I have a mind thou shouldst marry, that so
thou mayst stay in my dominions, and think no more of thy own
country." I durst not resist the prince's will, and he gave me one
of the ladies of his court, noble, beautiful, and rich. The
ceremonies of marriage being over, I went and dwelt with my wife
and for some time we lived together in perfect harmony. I was not,
however, satisfied with my banishment; therefore designed to make
my escape the first opportunity, and to return to Bagdad, which my
present settlement, how advantageous soever, could not make me
forget.

At this time the wife of one of my neighbors, with whom I had
contracted a very strict friendship, fell sick and died. I went
to see and comfort him in his affliction, and, finding him
absorbed in sorrow, I said to him as soon as I saw him, "God
preserve you and grant you a long life." "Alas!" replied he, "how
do you think I should obtain the favor you wish me? I have not
above an hour to live, for I must be buried this day with my wife.
This is a law in this island. The living husband is interred with
the dead wife, and the living wife with the dead husband."

While he was giving an account of this barbarous custom, the very
relation of which chilled my blood, his kindred, friends, and
neighbors came to assist at the funeral. They dressed the corpse
of the woman in her richest apparel and all her jewels as if it
had been her wedding day; then they placed her on an open bier,
and began their march to the place of burial. The husband walked
first, next to the dead body. They proceeded to a high mountain,
and when they had reached the place of their destination, they
took up a large stone which formed the mouth of a deep pit, and
let down the body with all its apparel and jewels. Then the
husband, embracing his kindred and friends, suffered himself to be
placed on another bier without resistance, with a pot of water and
seven small loaves, and was let down in the same manner. The
ceremony being over, the mouth of the pit was again covered with
the stone, and the company returned.

I mention this ceremony the more particularly, because I was in a
few weeks' time to be the principal actor on a similar occasion.
Alas! my own wife fell sick and died. I made every remonstrance I
could to the king not to expose me, a foreigner, to this inhuman
law. I appealed in vain. The king and all his court, with the most
considerable persons in the city, sought to soften my sorrow by
honoring the funeral ceremony with their presence; and, at the
termination of the ceremony, I was lowered into the pit, with a
vessel full of water and seven loaves. As I approached the bottom,
I discovered, by the aid of the little light that came from
above, the nature of this subterranean place. It seemed an endless
cavern, and might be about fifty fathoms deep. I lived for some
time there upon my bread and water, when one day, just as it was
on the point of exhaustion, I heard something tread, and breathing
or panting as it moved. I followed the sound. The animal seemed to
stop sometimes, but always fled and breathed hard as I approached.
I pursued it for a considerable time, till at last I perceived a
light, resembling a star. I went on, sometimes lost sight of it,
but always found it again, and at last discovered that it came
through a hole in the rock, which I got through, and found myself
upon the seashore, at which I felt exceeding joy. I prostrated
myself on the shore to thank God for this mercy, and shortly
afterward I perceived a ship making for the place where I was. I
made a sign with the linen of my turban, and called to the crew as
loud as I could. They heard me, and sent a boat to bring me on
board. It was fortunate for me that these people did not inspect
the place where they found me, but without hesitation took me on
board.

We passed by several islands, and, among others, that called the
Isle of Bells, about ten days' sail from Serendib with a regular
wind, and six from that of Kela, where we landed. Lead mines are
found in the island; also Indian canes and excellent camphire.

The king of the Isle of Kela is very rich and powerful, and the
Isle of Bells, which is about two days' journey in extent, is also
subject to him.

The inhabitants are so barbarous that they still eat human flesh.
After we had finished our traffic in that island we put to sea
again, and touched at several other ports; at last I arrived
happily at Bagdad. Out of gratitude to God for His mercies, I
contributed liberally toward the support of several mosques and
the subsistence of the poor, and enjoyed myself with friends in
festivities and amusements.

Here Sindbad made a new present of one hundred sequins to Hindbad,
whom he requested to return with the rest next day at the same
hour, to dine with him and hear the story of his fifth voyage.




THE FIFTH VOYAGE


All the troubles and calamities I had undergone could not cure me
of my inclination to make new voyages. I therefore bought goods,
departed with them for the best seaport; and there, that I might
not be obliged to depend upon a captain, but have a ship at my own
command, I remained till one was built on purpose, at my own
charge. When the ship was ready I went on board with my goods; but
not having enough to load her, I agreed to take with me several
merchants of different nations, with their merchandise.

We sailed with the first fair wind, and, after a long navigation,
the first place we touched at was a desert island, where we found
an egg of a roc, equal in size to that I formerly mentioned. There
was a young roc in it, just ready to be hatched, and its beak had
begun to break the egg. The merchants who landed with me broke the
egg with hatchets, and made a hole in it, pulled out the young
roc, piecemeal, and roasted it. I had in vain entreated them not
to meddle with the egg.

Scarcely had they finished their repast, When there appeared in
the air, at a considerable distance, two great clouds. The captain
of my ship, knowing by experience what they meant, said they were
the male and female parents of the roc, and pressed us to re-
embark with all speed, to prevent the misfortune which he saw
would otherwise befall us.

The two rocs approached with a frightful noise, which they
redoubled when they saw the egg broken and their young one gone.
They flew back in the direction they had come, and disappeared for
some time, while we made all the sail we could to endeavor to
prevent that which unhappily befell us.

They soon returned, and we observed that each of them carried
between its talons an enormous rock. When they came directly over
my ship, they hovered, and one of them let go his rock; but by the
dexterity of the steersman it missed us, and fell into the sea.
The other so exactly hit the middle of the ship as to split it
into pieces. The mariners and passengers were all crushed to
death, or fell into the sea. I myself was of the number of the
latter; but, as I came up again, I fortunately caught hold of a
piece of the wreck, and swimming, sometimes with one hand and
sometimes with the other, but always holding fast the plank, the
wind and the tide favoring me, I came to an island, and got safely
ashore.

I sat down upon the grass, to recover myself from my fatigue,
after which I went into the island to explore it. It seemed to be
a delicious garden. I found trees everywhere, some of them bearing
green and others ripe fruits, and streams of fresh pure water. I
ate of the fruits, which I found excellent; and drank of the
water, which was very light and good.

When I was a little advanced into the island, I saw an old man,
who appeared very weak and infirm. He was sitting on the bank of a
stream, and at first I took him to be one who had been shipwrecked
like myself. I went toward him and saluted him, but he only
slightly bowed his head. I asked him why he sat so still; but
instead of answering me, he made a sign for me to take him upon my
back, and carry him over the brook.

I believed him really to stand in need of my assistance, took him
upon my back, and having carried him over, bade him get down, and
for that end stooped, that he might get off with ease; but instead
of doing so (which I laugh at every time I think of it), the old
man, who to me appeared quite decrepit, threw his legs nimbly
about my neck. He sat astride upon my shoulders, and held my
throat so tight that I thought he would have strangled me, and I
fainted away.

Notwithstanding my fainting, the ill-natured old fellow still kept
his seat upon my neck. When I had recovered my breath, he thrust
one of his feet against my side, and struck me so rudely with the
other that he forced me to rise up against my will. Having arisen,
he made me carry him under the trees, and forced me now and then
to stop, that he might gather and eat fruit. He never left his
seat all day; and when I lay down to rest at night, he laid
himself down with me, holding still fast about my neck. Every
morning he pinched me to make me awake, and afterward obliged me
to get up and walk, and spurred me with his feet.

One day I found several dry calabashes that had fallen from a
tree. I took a large one, and, after cleaning it, pressed into it
some juice of grapes, which abounded in the island; having filled
the calabash, I put it by in a convenient place, and going thither
again some days after, I tasted it, and found the wine so good
that it gave me new vigor, and so exhilarated my spirits that I
began to sing and dance as I carried my burden.

The old man, perceiving the effect which this had upon me, and
that I carried him with more ease than before, made me a sign to
give him some of it. I handed him the calabash, and the liquor
pleasing his palate, he drank it off. There being a considerable
quantity of it, he soon began to sing, and to move about from side
to side in his seat upon my shoulders, and by degrees to loosen
his legs from about me. Finding that he did not press me as
before, I threw him upon the ground, where he lay without motion;
I then took up a great stone and slew him.

I was extremely glad to be thus freed for ever from this
troublesome fellow. I now walked toward the beach, where I met the
crew of a ship that had cast anchor to take in water; they were
surprised to see me, but more so at hearing the particulars of my
adventures. "You fell," said they, "into the hands of the Old Man
of the Sea, and are the first who ever escaped strangling by his
malicious embraces. He never quitted those he had once made
himself master of till he had destroyed them, and he has made this
island notorious by the number of men he has slain." They carried
me with them to the captain, who received me with great kindness.
He put out again to sea, and, after some days' sail, we arrived at
the harbor of a great city, the houses of which overhung the sea.

One of the merchants who had taken me into his friendship invited
me to go along with him. He gave me a large sack, and having
recommended me to some people of the town, who used to gather
cocoanuts, desired them to take me with them. "Go," said he,
"follow them, and act as you see them do; but do not separate from
them, otherwise you may endanger your life." Having thus spoken,
he gave me provisions for the journey, and I went with them.

We came to a thick forest of cocoa trees, very lofty, with trunks
so smooth that it was not possible to climb to the branches that
bore the fruit. When we entered the forest we saw a great number
of apes of several sizes, who fled as soon as they perceived us,
and climbed to the tops of the trees with amazing swiftness.

The merchants with whom I was gathered stones, and threw them at
the apes on the trees. I did the same; and the apes, out of
revenge, threw coconuts at us so fast, and with such gestures, as
sufficiently testified their anger and resentment. We gathered up
the cocoanuts, and from time to time threw stones to provoke the
apes; so that by this stratagem we filled our bags with cocoanuts.
I thus gradually collected as many cocoanuts as produced me a
considerable sum.

Having laden our vessel with cocoanuts, we set sail, and passed by
the islands where pepper grows in great plenty. From thence we
went to the Isle of Comari, where the best species of wood of
aloes grows. I exchanged my cocoa in those two islands for pepper
and wood of aloes, and went with other merchants a-pearl-fishing,
I hired divers, who brought me up some that were very large and
pure. I embarked in a vessel that happily arrived at Bussorah;
from thence I returned to Bagdad, where I realized vast sums from
my pepper, wood of aloes, and pearls. I gave the tenth of my gains
in alms, as I had done upon my return from my other voyages, and
rested from my fatigues.

Sindbad here ordered one hundred sequins to be given to Hindbad,
and requested him and the other guests to dine with him the next
day, to hear the account of his sixth voyage.




THE SIXTH VOYAGE


I know, my friends, that you will wish to hear how, after having
been shipwrecked five times, and escaped so many dangers, I could
resolve again to tempt fortune, and expose myself to new
hardships. I am myself astonished at my conduct when I reflect
upon it, and must certainly have been actuated by my destiny, from
which none can escape. Be that as it may, after a year's rest I
prepared for a sixth voyage, notwithstanding the entreaties of my
kindred and friends, who did all in their power to dissuade me.

Instead of taking my way by the Persian Gulf, I travelled once
more through several provinces of Persia and the Indies, and
arrived at a seaport, where I embarked in a ship, the captain of
which was bound on a long voyage, in which he and the pilot lost
their course. Suddenly we saw the captain quit his rudder,
uttering loud lamentations. He threw off his turban, pulled his
beard, and beat his head like a madman. We asked him the reason;
and he answered that we were in the most dangerous place in all
the ocean. "A rapid current carries the ship along with it, and we
shall all perish in less than a quarter of an hour. Pray to God to
deliver us from this peril; we cannot escape if He do not take
pity on us." At these words he ordered the sails to be lowered;
but all the ropes broke, and the ship was carried by the current
to the foot of an inaccessible mountain, where she struck and went
to pieces; yet in such a manner that we saved our lives, our
provisions, and the best of our goods.

The mountain at the foot of which we were was covered with wrecks,
with a vast number of human bones, and with an incredible quantity
of goods and riches of all kinds. These objects served only to
augment our despair. In all other places it is usual for rivers to
run from their channels into the sea; but here a river of fresh
water runs from the sea into a dark cavern, whose entrance is very
high and spacious. What is most remarkable in this place is that
the stones of the mountain are of crystal, rubies, or other
precious stones. Here is also a sort of fountain of pitch or
bitumen, that runs into the sea, which the fish swallow, and
evacuate soon afterward, turned into ambergris; and this the waves
throw up on the beach in great quantities. Trees also grow here,
most of which are of wood of aloes, equal in goodness to those of
Comari.

To finish the description of this place, it is not possible for
ships to get off when once they approach within a certain
distance. If they be driven thither by a wind from the sea, the
wind and the current impel them; and if they come into it when a
land wind blows, which might seem to favor their getting out
again, the height of the mountain stops the wind, and occasions a
calm, so that the force of the current carries them ashore: and
what completes the misfortune is that there is no possibility of
ascending the mountain, or of escaping by sea.

We continued upon the shore, at the foot of the mountain, in a
state of despair, and expected death every day. On our first
landing we had divided our provisions as equally as we could, and
thus every one lived a longer or shorter time, according to his
temperance, and the use he made of his provisions.

I survived all my companions; and when I buried the last I had so
little provisions remaining that I thought I could not long
survive, and I dug a grave, resolving to lie down in it, because
there was no one left to pay me the last offices of respect. But
it pleased God once more to take compassion on me, and put it in
my mind to go to the bank of the river which ran into the great
cavern. Considering its probable course with great attention, I
said to myself, "This river, which runs thus underground, must
somewhere have an issue. If I make a raft, and leave myself to the
current, it will convey me to some inhabited country, or I shall
perish. If I be drowned I lose nothing, but only change one kind
of death for another."

I immediately went to work upon large pieces of timber and cables,
for I had a choice of them from the wrecks, and tied them together
so strongly that I soon made a very solid raft. When I had
finished, I loaded it with some chests of rubies, emeralds,
ambergris, rock crystal and bales of rich stuffs. Having balanced
my cargo exactly, and fastened it well to the raft, I went on
board with two oars that I had made, and leaving it to the course
of the river, resigned myself to the will of God.

As soon as I entered the cavern I lost all light, and the stream
carried me I knew not whither. Thus I floated on in perfect
darkness, and once, found the arch so low that it very nearly
touched my head, which made me cautious afterward to avoid the
like danger. All this while I ate nothing but what was just
necessary to support nature; yet, notwithstanding my frugality,
all my provisions were spent. Then I became insensible. I cannot
tell how long I continued so; but when I revived, I was surprised
to find myself in an extensive plain on the brink of a river,
where my raft was tied, among a great number of negroes. I got up
as soon as I saw them, and saluted them. They spoke to me, but I
did not understand their language.

I was so transported with joy that I knew not whether I was asleep
or awake; but being persuaded that I was not asleep, I recited the
following words in Arabic aloud:

"Call upon the Almighty, He will help thee; thou needst not
perplex thyself about anything else: shut thy eyes, and while thou
art asleep God will change thy bad fortune into good."

One of the negroes, who understood Arabic, hearing me speak thus,
came toward me, and said: "Brother, be not surprised to see us; we
are inhabitants of this country, and water our fields from this
river, which comes out of the neighboring mountain. We saw your
raft, and one of us swam into the river, and brought it hither,
where we fastened it, as you see, until you should awake. Pray
tell us your history. Whence did you come?"

I begged of them first to give me something to eat, and then I
would satisfy their curiosity. They gave me several sorts of food,
and when I had satisfied my hunger, I related all that had
befallen me, which they listened to with attentive surprise. As
soon as I had finished they told me, by the person who spoke
Arabic and interpreted to them what I said, that I must go along
with them, and tell my story to their king myself; it being too
extraordinary to be related by any other than the person to whom
the events had happened.

They immediately sent for a horse, and having helped me to mount,
some of them walked before to show the way, while the rest took my
raft and cargo and followed.

We marched till we came to the capital of Serendib, for it was in
that island I had landed. The negroes presented me to their king;
I approached his throne, and saluted him as I used to do the kings
of the Indies; that is to say, I prostrated myself at his feet.
The prince ordered me to rise, received me with an obliging air,
and made me sit down near him.

I concealed nothing from the king; but related to him all that I
have told you. At last my raft was brought in, and the bales
opened in his presence: he admired the quantity of wood of aloes
and ambergris; but above all, the rubies and emeralds, for he had
none in his treasury that equalled them.

Observing that he looked on my jewels with pleasure, and viewed
the most remarkable among them, one after another, I fell
prostrate at his feet, and took the liberty to say to him, "Sire,
not only my person is at your majesty's service, but the cargo of
the raft, and I would beg of you to dispose of it as your own."

He answered me with a smile, "Sindbad, I will take nothing of
yours; far from lessening your wealth, I design to augment it, and
will not let you quit my dominions without marks of my liberality."

He then charged one of his officers to take care of me, and
ordered people to serve me at his own expense. The officer was
very faithful in the execution of his commission, and caused all
the goods to be carried to the lodgings provided for me.

I went every day at a set hour to make my court to the king, and
spent the rest of my time in viewing the city, and what was most
worthy of notice.

The capital of Serendib stands at the end of a fine valley, in the
middle of the island, encompassed by high mountains. They are seen
three days' sail off at sea. Rubies and several sorts of minerals
abound. All kinds of rare plants and trees grow there, especially
cedars and cocoanut. There is also a pearl-fishery in the mouth of
its principal river; and in some of its valleys are found
diamonds. I made, by way of devotion, a pilgrimage to the place
where Adam was confined after his banishment from Paradise, and
had the curiosity to go to the top of the mountain.

When I returned to the city I prayed the king to allow me to
return to my own country, and he granted me permission in the most
obliging and honorable manner. He would force a rich present upon
me; and at the same time charged me with a letter for the
Commander of the Faithful, our sovereign, saying to me, "I pray
you give this present from me, and this letter, to the Caliph
Haroun-al-Raschid, and assure him of my friendship."

The letter from the King of Serendib was written on the skin of a
certain animal of great value, very scarce, and of a yellowish
color. The characters of this letter were of azure, and the
contents as follows:

"The King of the Indies, before whom march one hundred elephants,
who lives in a palace that shines with one hundred thousand
rubies, and who has in his treasury twenty thousand crowns
enriched with diamonds, to Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid.

"Though the present we send you be inconsiderable, receive it,
however, as a brother and a friend, in consideration of the hearty
friendship which we bear for you, and of which we are willing to
give you proof. We desire the same part in your friendship,
considering that we believe it to be our merit, as we are both
kings. We send you this letter as from one brother to another.
Farewell."

The present consisted, first, of one single ruby made into a cup,
about half a foot high, an inch thick, and filled with round
pearls of half a drachm each. 2. The skin of a serpent, whose
scales were as bright as an ordinary piece of gold, and had the
virtue to preserve from sickness those who lay upon it. 3. Fifty
thousand drachms of the best wood of aloes, with thirty grains of
camphire as big as pistachios. And 4. A female slave of great
beauty, whose robe was covered over with jewels.

The ship set sail, and after a very successful navigation we
landed at Bussorah, and from thence I went to the city of Bagdad,
where the first thing I did was to acquit myself of my commission.

I took the King of Serendib's letter, and went to present myself
at the gate of the Commander of the Faithful, and was immediately
conducted to the throne of the caliph. I made my obeisance, and
presented the letter and gift. When he had read what the King of
Serendib wrote to him, he asked me if that prince were really so
rich and potent as he represented himself in his letter. I
prostrated myself a second time, and, rising again, said,
"Commander of the Faithful, I can assure your majesty he doth not
exceed the truth. I bear him witness. Nothing is more worthy of
admiration than the magnificence of his palace. When the prince
appears in public he has a throne fixed on the back of an
elephant, and rides between two ranks of his ministers, favorites,
and other people of his court. Before him, upon the same elephant,
an officer carries a golden lance in his hand; and behind him
there is another, who stands with a rod of gold, on the top of
which is an emerald, half a foot long and an inch thick. He is
attended by a guard of one thousand men, clad in cloth of gold and
silk, and mounted on elephants richly caparisoned. The officer who
is before him on the same elephant cries from time to time, with a
loud voice, 'Behold the great monarch, the potent and redoubtable
Sultan of the Indies, the monarch greater than Solomon, and the
powerful Maharaja.'

"After he has pronounced those words, the officer behind the
throne cries in his turn, 'This monarch, so great and so powerful,
must die, must die, must die!' And the officer before replies,
'Praise alone be to Him who liveth for ever and ever.'"

The caliph was much pleased with my account, and sent me home with
a rich present.

Here Sindbad commanded another hundred sequins to be paid to
Hindbad, and begged his return on the morrow to hear his seventh
and last voyage.




THE SEVENTH AND LAST VOYAGE


On my return home from my sixth voyage, I had entirely given up
all thoughts of again going to sea; for, besides that my age now
required rest, I was resolved no more to expose myself to such
risks as I had encountered, so that I thought of nothing but to
pass the rest of my days in tranquillity. One day, however, an
officer of the caliph's inquired for me. "The caliph," said he,
"has sent me to tell you that he must speak with you." I followed
the officer to the palace, where, being presented to the caliph, I
saluted him by prostrating myself at his feet. "Sindbad," said he
to me, "I stand in need of your services; you must carry my answer
and present to the King of Serendib."

This command of the caliph was to me like a clap of thunder.
"Commander of the Faithful," I replied, "I am ready to do whatever
your majesty shall think fit to command; but I beseech you most
humbly to consider what I have undergone. I have also made a vow
never to leave Bagdad."

Perceiving that the caliph insisted upon my compliance, I
submitted, and told him that I was willing to obey. He was very
well pleased, and ordered me one thousand sequins for the expenses
of my journey.

I prepared for my departure in a few days. As soon as the caliph's
letter and present were delivered to me, I went to Bussorah, where
I embarked, and had a very prosperous voyage. Having arrived at
the Isle of Serendib, I was conducted to the palace with much
pomp, when I prostrated myself on the ground before the king.
"Sindbad," said the king, "you are welcome; I have many times
thought of you; I bless the day on which I see you once more." I
made my compliments to him, and thanked him for his kindness, and
delivered the gifts from my august master.

The caliph's letter was as follows:

"Greeting, in the name of the Sovereign Guide of the Right Way,
from the servant of God, Haroun-al-Raschid, whom God hath set in
the place of vicegerent to His Prophet, after his ancestors of
happy memory, to the potent and esteemed Raja of Serendib.

"We receive your letter with joy, and send you from our imperial
residence, the garden of superior wits. We hope when you look
upon it you will perceive our good intention, and be pleased with
it. Farewell."

The caliph's present was a complete suit of cloth of gold, valued
at one thousand sequins; fifty robes of rich stuff; a hundred of
white cloth, the finest of Cairo, Suez, and Alexandria; a vessel
of agate, more broad than deep, an inch thick, and half a foot
wide, the bottom of which represented in bas-relief a man with one
knee on the ground, who held a bow and an arrow, ready to
discharge at a lion. He sent him also a rich tablet, which,
according to tradition, belonged to the great Solomon.

The King of Serendib was highly gratified at the caliph's
acknowledgment of his friendship. A little time after this
audience I solicited leave to depart, and with much difficulty
obtained it. The king, when he dismissed me, made me a very
considerable present. I embarked immediately to return to Bagdad,
but had not the good-fortune to arrive there so speedily as I had
hoped. God ordered it otherwise.

Three or four days after our departure we were attacked by
pirates, who easily seized upon our ship, because it was not a
vessel of war. Some of the crew offered resistance, which cost
them their lives. But for myself and the rest, who were not so
imprudent, the pirates saved us, and carried us into a remote
island, where they sold us.

I fell into the hands of a rich merchant, who, as soon as he
bought me, took me to his house, treated me well, and clad me
handsomely as a slave. Some days after he asked me if I understood
any trade. I answered that I was no mechanic, but a merchant, and
that the pirates who sold me had robbed me of all I possessed.
"Tell me," replied he, "can you shoot with a bow?" I answered that
the bow was one of my exercises in my youth. He gave me a bow and
arrows, and, taking me behind him on an elephant, carried me to a
thick forest some leagues from the town. We penetrated a great way
into the wood, and when he thought fit to stop, he bade me alight;
then showing me a great tree, "Climb up that," said he, "and shoot
at the elephants as you see them pass by, for there is a
prodigious number of them in this forest, and if any of them fall,
come and give me notice." Having spoken thus, he left me victuals,
and returned to the town, and I continued upon the tree all night.

I saw no elephant during the night, but next morning, at break of
day, I perceived a great number. I shot several arrows among them,
and at last one of the elephants fell, when the rest retired
immediately, and left me at liberty to go and acquaint my patron
with my success. When I had informed him, he commended my
dexterity, and caressed me highly. We went afterward together to
the forest, where we dug a hole for the elephant; my patron
designing to return when it was rotten, and take his teeth to
trade with.

I continued this employment for two months. One morning, as I
looked for the elephants, I perceived with extreme amazement that,
instead of passing by me across the forest as usual, they stopped,
and came to me with a horrible noise, in such numbers that the
plain was covered and shook under them. They surrounded the tree
in which I was concealed, with their trunks uplifted, and all
fixed their eyes upon me. At this alarming spectacle I continued
immovable, and was so much terrified that my bow and arrows fell
out of my hand.

My fears were not without cause; for after the elephants had
stared upon me some time, one of the largest of them put his trunk
round the foot of the tree, plucked it up, and threw it on the
ground. I fell with the tree, and the elephant, taking me up with
his trunk, laid me on his back, where I sat more like one dead
than alive, with my quiver on my shoulder. He put himself at the
head of the rest, who followed him in line, one after the other,
carried me a considerable way, then laid me down on the ground,
and retired with all his companions. After having lain some time,
and seeing the elephants gone, I got up, and found I was upon a
long and broad hill, almost covered with the bones and teeth of
elephants. I doubted not but that this was the burial-place of the
elephants, and that they carried me thither on purpose to tell me
that I should forbear to kill them, as now I knew where to get
their teeth without inflicting injury on them. I did not stay on
the hill, but turned toward the city; and after having travelled a
day and a night, I came to my patron.

As soon as my patron saw me, "Ah, poor Sindbad!" exclaimed he, "I
was in great trouble to know what was become of you. I have been
at the forest, where I found a tree newly pulled up, and your bow
and arrows on the ground, and I despaired of ever seeing you more.
Pray tell me what befell you." I satisfied his curiosity, and we
both of us set out next morning to the hill. We loaded the
elephant which had carried us with as many teeth as he could bear;
and when we were returned, my master thus addressed me: "Hear now
what I shall tell you. The elephants of our forest have every year
killed us a great many slaves, whom we sent to seek ivory. For all
the cautions we could give them, those crafty animals destroyed
them one time or other. God has delivered you from their fury, and
has bestowed that favor upon you only. It is a sign that He loves
you, and has some use for your service in the world. You have
procured me incredible wealth; and now our whole city is enriched
by your means, without any more exposing the lives of our slaves.
After such a discovery, I can treat you no more as a slave, but as
a brother. God bless you with all happiness and prosperity. I
henceforth give you your liberty; I will also give you riches."

To this I replied: "Master, God preserve you. I desire no other
reward for the service I had the good-fortune to do to you and
your city but leave to return to my own country." "Very well,"
said he, "the monsoon will in a little time bring ships for ivory.
I will then send you home." I stayed with him while waiting for
the monsoon; and during that time we made so many journeys to the
hill, that we filled all our warehouses with ivory. The other
merchants who traded in it did the same, for my master made them
partakers of his good-fortune.

The ships arrived at last, and my master himself having made
choice of the ship wherein I was to embark, loaded half of it with
ivory on my account, laid in provisions in abundance for my
passage, and besides obliged me to accept a present of some
curiosities of the country of great value. After I had returned
him a thousand thanks for all his favors I went aboard. We stopped
at some islands to take in fresh provisions. Our vessel being come
to a port on the mainland in the Indies, we touched there, and,
not being willing to venture by sea to Bussorah, I landed my
proportion of the ivory, resolving to proceed on my journey by
land. I realized vast sums by my ivory, bought several rarities,
which I intended for presents, and when my equipage was ready, set
out in company with a large caravan of merchants. I was a long
time on the journey, and suffered much, but was happy in thinking
that I had nothing to fear from the seas, from pirates, from
serpents, or from the other perils to which I had been exposed.

I at last arrived safe at Bagdad, and immediately waited upon the
caliph, to give him an account of my embassy. He loaded me with
honors and rich presents, and I have ever since devoted myself to
my family, kindred, and friends.

Sindbad here finished the relation of his seventh and last voyage,
and then addressing himself to Hindbad, "Well, friend," said he,
"did you ever hear of any person that suffered so much as I have
done? Is it not reasonable that, after all this, I should enjoy a
quiet and pleasant life?" As he said these words, Hindbad kissed
his hand, and said, "Sir, my afflictions are not to be compared
with yours. You not only deserve a quiet life, but are worthy of
all the riches you possess, since you make so good a use of them.
May you live happily for a long time." Sindbad ordered him to be
paid another hundred sequins, and told him to give up carrying
burdens as a porter, and to eat henceforth at his table, for he
wished that he should all his life have reason to remember that he
henceforth had a friend in Sindbad the Sailor.
